---
sidebar_position: 6
---

# Validator FAQ

Check the FAQ for running a validator on Qubetics.

## General Concepts

<details>

<summary><b>What is a validator?</b></summary>

Qubetics is powered by [Tendermint](https://docs.tendermint.com/v0.34/introduction/what-is-tendermint.html) Core,
which relies on a set of validators to secure the network. Validators run a full node and participate in consensus
by broadcasting votes which contain cryptographic signatures signed by their private key. Validators commit new
blocks in the blockchain and receive revenue in exchange for their work. They also participate in on-protocol
treasury governance by voting on governance proposals. A validator's voting influence is weighted according to
their total stake.

</details>

<details>

<summary><b>What is "staking"?</b></summary>

Qubetics is a public Proof-of-Stake (PoS) blockchain, meaning that validator's weight is determined by the amount of
staking tokens (TICS) bonded as collateral. These staking tokens can be staked directly by the validator or delegated
to them by Qubetics holders.

Any user in the system can declare its intention to become a validator by sending a `create-validator` transaction.
From there, they become validators.

The weight (i.e. total stake or voting power) of a validator determines wether or not it is an active validator,
and also how frequently this node will have to propose a block and how much revenue it will obtain. Initially, only
the top 150 validators with the most weight will be active validators. If validators double-sign, or are frequently
offline, they risk their staked tokens (including Qubetics delegated by users) being "slashed" by the protocol to
penalize negligence and misbehavior.

</details>

<details>

<summary><b>What is a full node?</b></summary>

A full node is a program that fully validates transactions and blocks of a blockchain. It is distinct from a light
client node that only processes block headers and a small subset of transactions. Running a full node requires more
resources than a light client but is necessary in order to be a validator. In practice, running a full-node only
implies running a non-compromised and up-to-date version of the software with low network latency and without downtime.

Of course, it is possible and encouraged for any user to run full nodes even if they do not plan to be validators.

</details>

<details>

<summary><b>What is a delegator?</b></summary>

Delegators are Qubetics holders who cannot, or do not want to run validator operations themselves. Users can delegate
QUbetics to a validator and obtain a part of its revenue in exchange (for more detail on how revenue is distributed, see
`What is the incentive to stake?` and `What is a validator's commission?` sections below).

Because they share revenue with their validators, delegators also share responsibility. Should a validator misbehave,
each of its delegators will be partially slashed in proportion to their stake. This is why delegators should perform
due-diligence on validators before delegating, as well as diversifying by spreading their stake over multiple validators.

Delegators play a critical role in the system, as they are responsible for choosing validators. Be aware that being a
delegator is not a passive role. Delegators are obligated to remain vigilant and actively monitor the actions of their
validators, switching should they fail to act responsibly.

</details>

## Validator keys and states

<details>

<summary><b>What are the different types of keys?</b></summary>

In short, there are two types of keys:

- **Tendermint Key**: This is a unique key used to sign block hashes. It is associated with a public key
`qubeticsvalconspub`.
    - Generated when the node is created with `qubeticsd init`.
    - Get this value with `qubeticsd tendermint show-validator`
e.g. `qubeticsvalconspub1zcjduc3qcyj09qc03elte23zwshdx92jm6ce88fgc90rtqhjx8v0608qh5ssp0w94c`

- **Application keys**: These keys are created from the application and used to sign transactions. As a validator,
you will probably use one key to sign staking-related transactions, and another key to sign oracle-related
transactions. Application keys are associated with a public key `qubeticspub-` and an address `qubetics-`. Both
are derived from account keys generated by `qubeticsd keys add`.

:::warning
A validator's operator key is directly tied to an application key, but uses reserved prefixes solely for this
purpose: `qubeticsvaloper` and `qubeticsvaloperpub`
:::

</details>

<details>

<summary><b>What are the different states a validator can be in?</b></summary>

After a validator is created with a `create-validator` transaction, it can be in three states:

- `bonded`: Validator is in the active set and participates in consensus. Validator is earning rewards and can be
slashed for misbehaviour.
- `unbonding`: Validator is not in the active set and does not participate in consensus. Validator is not earning
rewards, but can still be slashed for misbehaviour. This is a transition state from `bonded` to `unbonded`. If
validator does not send a `rebond` transaction while in `unbonding` mode, it will take two weeks for the state
transition to complete.
- `unbonded`: Validator is not in the active set, and therefore not signing blocks. Unbonded validators cannot be
slashed, but do not earn any rewards from their operation. It is still possible to delegate QUBETICS to this
validator. Un-delegating from an `unbonded` validator is immediate.

Delegators have the same state as their validator.

:::warning
Delegations are not necessarily bonded. Qubetics can be delegated and bonded, delegated and unbonding, delegated and
unbonded, or liquid.
:::

</details>

<details>

<summary><b>What is "self-bond"? How can I increase my "self-bond"?</b></summary>

The validator operator's "self-bond" refers to the amount of Qubetics stake delegated to itself. You can increase your
self-bond by delegating more Qubetics to your validator account.

</details>

<details>

<summary><b>Is there a testnet faucet?</b></summary>

If you want to obtain coins for the testnet, you can do so by using the [faucet](https://testnet.qubetics.work/faucet).

</details>

<details>

<summary><b>Is there a minimum amount of Qubetics that must be staked to be an active (bonded) validator?</b></summary>

There is no minimum. The top 100 validators with the highest total stake (where
`total stake = self-bonded stake + delegators stake`) are the active validators.

</details>

<details>

<summary><b>How will delegators choose their validators?</b></summary>

Delegators are free to choose validators according to their own subjective criteria. That said, criteria anticipated to
be important include:

- **Amount of self-bonded QUBETICS:** Number of QUBETICS a validator self-bonded to its staking pool. A validator with higher
amount of self-bonded QUBETICS has more skin in the game, making it more liable for its actions.

- **Amount of delegated QUBETICS:** Total number of QUBETICS delegated to a validator. A high stake shows that the community
trusts this validator, but it also means that this validator is a bigger target for hackers. Validators are expected
to become less and less attractive as their amount of delegated QUBETICS grows. Bigger validators also increase the
centralization of the network.

- **Commission rate:** Commission applied on revenue by validators before it is distributed to their delegators

- **Track record:** Delegators will likely look at the track record of the validators they plan to delegate to. This
includes seniority, past votes on proposals, historical average uptime and how often the node was compromised.

Apart from these criteria, there will be a possibility for validators to signal a website address to complete their
resume. Validators will need to build reputation one way or another to attract delegators. For example, it would be
a good practice for validators to have their setup audited by third parties. Note though, that the qubetics team will
not approve or conduct any audit itself.

</details>
